--- Page 1 ---
International cargo charter operations and preighter performances in the 
context of COVID-19: a case of China
Chuntao Wu
a , *
, Xiaohe He
a
, Yuliang Peng
b
a
School of Tourism, Sichuan University, No. 2 South Section, Yihuan Road, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610064, PR China
b
College of Computer, Mathematical, and Natural Sciences (CMNS), University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA
1. Introduction
Air transport services are commonly classified as either scheduled or 
non-scheduled. ICAO (2022) classifies non-scheduled (revenue) cargo 
flights as cargo charter and defines them as “ cargo charter flights, 
including those chartered for resale by freight forwarders, consolidators, 
shippers' associations, express/small-package/courier services, and 
similar charterers, as well as those operated for the charterer's own use 
rather than for resale ” . Cargo charters have long played a critical role in 
transporting urgent, specialized, high-value, or outsized shipments on 
international routes ( Morrell and Klein, 2018 ), accounting for 6 – 7% of 
global air cargo traffic during the 2010s ( Boeing, 2022 ). During the 
COVID-19 pandemic, the share of nonscheduled cargo increased to 14% 
in 2020 and 15% in 2021 ( Boeing, 2024 ), driven by several factors 
especially the suspension of scheduled passenger flights (and the asso -
ciated loss of belly capacity), a sharp increase in urgent shipments, and 
the operation of “ preighters ” (all-cargo operations using aircraft nor -
mally designed for passenger transport) ( ICAO, 2022 ). By 2023, the 
non-scheduled share remained elevated at 13% ( Boeing, 2024 ), 
reflecting the importance of charter operations in the post-COVID 
period. Yet scholarly understanding of this segment remains limited. 
To the best of the authors' knowledge, no academic study has yet 
examined international cargo charter operations.
China represents an ideal case for examining the formation and 
transformation processes of a large-scale international cargo charter 
market, particularly within a comparatively less regulated, market- 
oriented policy environment, and in the context of the COVID-19 
pandemic. Cargo charter markets are unevenly distributed across 
countries. For example, in 2019, charter service accounted for 16% of all 
air freight to and from the United States,
1
whereas its share in China's 
international cargo market was below 1%.
2
The Civil Aviation Admin -
istration of China (CAAC) had imposed strict limits on international non- 
scheduled services to protect scheduled flights ( Wu et al., 2018 ) and 
emphasized equal treatment in approving charter permits for foreign 
carriers ( CAAC, 2006 ). Following the outbreak of COVID-19, the CAAC 
strictly enforced the “ Five-One ” policy to limit international passenger 
flights but issued a series of notices and flexible policy measures to 
facilitate international air cargo transport ( ICAO, 2021 ). In particular, 
on April 3, 2020, it launched the Notice on Launching a Review and 
Approval of the “ Green Channel ” for International Air Cargo Transport 
During the Period of Epidemic Prevention and Control ( CAAC, 2020 ) to 
promote the smooth and efficient review and approval of the interna -
tional cargo flight plan. With respect to non-scheduled cargo flights, 
CAAC (2020) adopted a set of deregulation policies and relaxation 
measures, conditionally allowing Chinese and foreign airlines to operate 
non-scheduled cargo flights on routes already served by scheduled ser -
vices (scheduled routes), relaxing documentation requirements for 
foreign airlines in applying for flight operating permits, and supporting 
qualified third-country carriers to operate international cargo charters 
to China. Against the background of widespread suspension of scheduled 
passenger services, and in the context of other policy support and market 
demand, the non-scheduled international cargo flights to and from 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: chuntao@scu.edu.cn (C. Wu). 
1
In terms of freight ton, according to the U.S. International Air Passenger and Freight Statistics Reports (T-100 segment data).
2
In terms of flight movements, estimated by the authors. The number of cargo charter flights is based on the lists of CAAC approvals for international non- 
scheduled flights, which classify non-scheduled flights into temporary extra flights and charter flights. Following ICAO (2022) and CAAC (2019) , this study 
regards all non-scheduled cargo flights as cargo charter flights. In 2019, Chinese airports handled a total of 996,000 international flight movements, including both 
passenger and cargo flights as well as scheduled and non-scheduled services. In China's international air cargo market, belly-hold cargo accounted for 48.6% of total 
freight volume, while dedicated freighters accounted for 51.4%. These figures indicate that the market share of cargo charter services was well below 1%.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Transport Policy
journal homepag e: www.else vier.com/loc ate/tranp ol
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2026.104173
Received 6 October 2025; Received in revised form 17 April 2026; Accepted 20 April 2026  
Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
Available online 21 April 2026 
0967-070X/© 2026 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
--- Page 2 ---
China surged from about 6000 in 2019 to more than 80,000 in 2021,
3
accounting for over 30% of all international cargo flights operated be -
tween China and rest of world in that year.
4
In addition, roughly three-quarters of the charters operated by Chi -
nese flag carrier used preighter aircraft, and the CAAC publicly released 
relevant data, creating a rare empirical opportunity and a strong ratio -
nale for evaluating preighter performance on international routes. Pre -
ighters, also referred to as passenger-to-cargo (P2C) or temporary 
passenger-to-freighter (P2F) aircraft, accounted for approximately 
10% of global international available cargo tonne-kilometres (ACTKs) in 
2020 and 15% in 2021 ( IATA, 2025 ). In the spring of 2020, when 
COVID-19 led to a global suspension of passenger flights, many airlines 
converted passenger aircraft to carry cargo, and aviation authorities 
issued temporary regulatory exemptions to enable preighter operations. 
Although preighters have attracted increasing attention in recent years, 
empirical evidence on their performance remains limited, highlighting a 
notable gap in the literature, particularly in the context of China. On 
routes between China and the rest of the world, the share of preighters 
was substantially higher than the global average, reaching 33% of in -
ternational cargo flights in 2021,
5
whereas dedicated full-cargo flight 
(freighter) accounted for 67%. Therefore, evaluating the efficiency of 
preighter operations in China is particularly important.
Whilst cargo charter is still one of the untouched research area, 
passenger charters have attracted researchers’ attention from various 
aspects. Over the last two decades, aviation deregulation always led to 
an increase in scheduled flights, particularly those provided by low-cost 
carriers (LCCs) and a decline in charter flights in many parts of the world 
( Dobruszkes et al., 2016 ). Accordingly, many researchers explored the 
extent to which LCCs could replace charter carriers (CCs), the substi -
tution of charter flights by scheduled flights, the impacts of scheduled 
service availability on charter demand, or the effect of charter operation 
deregulation. However, global passenger charter traffic increased 
constantly in the 2010s, despite increased scheduled service availability 
and LCC expansion. It is assumed that the tourism elements, through the 
activities of charterers (tour operators), could maintain the stability of 
charter demand and therefore enhance the resilience of the air charter 
transport system (e.g., Castillo-Manzano et al., 2017 ; Wu et al., 2023 ). 
Nevertheless, these propositions have yet to be tested within a theo -
retical framework, leaving open the question of whether systematic 
patterns driven by charterers can be identified.
With the above in mind, this paper takes China as the study area to 
investigate the evolution and transformation of international cargo 
charter operations during 2020–2021, with a specific focus on preighter 
charters operated by Chinese carriers. The main datasets were extracted 
from CAAC approval lists for international non-scheduled flights, while 
additional information was collected through document analysis and 
personal communications. Descriptive statistics, geographic 
visualization, and route network analysis are the primary methods 
employed. In addition to real (actual) network analysis approaches, we 
tentatively selected complex network indicators to quantify the perfor -
mance and reconfiguration trends of preighter charter networks. 
Furthermore, we reviewed CAAC's international charter policies and 
analyzed the changes in charter demand and route networks. We also 
examined the role of charterers (freight forwarders) in organizing 
charter flights and optimizing city-centered routes, aiming to identify 
the characteristics of the charter market and to reveal the mechanisms 
underlying the resilience of the air charter transport system.
This study makes four contributions to related literature. First, it 
advances the international air cargo research by analyzing the emer -
gence and transformation of a large-scale cargo charter market under a 
less regulated and more market-oriented environment, while also eval -
uating the performance of preighter operations. Second, it contributes to 
the literature on charter services by providing empirical evidence from 
the cargo market. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first paper 
focused on international cargo charter services. Methodologically, we 
interpret the mechanisms underlying the resilience of air charter 
transport systems by linking operational flexibility to charterer activ -
ities. Third, we introduce methods used in previous research on in -
tegrators to assess the evolutionary patterns and efficiency of networks 
built by cargo charter flights. Like charter operations, operational flex -
ibility is a defining characteristic of integrators, and the lack of 
comprehensive databases has constrained empirical research on in -
tegrators (e.g., Bowen, 2012 ; Malighetti et al., 2019 ). Thereby, we build 
a framework to investigate the evolutionary patterns and performance 
of charter flights. We also fill a research gap in the structural and dy -
namic analysis of highly flexible transport networks, such as those 
formed by integrators' flights and cargo charter flights. Fourth, this 
study contributes to the literature on China's air cargo transport from the 
perspective of both charter flights and preighter operations.
From a practical perspective, our findings enhance understanding of 
the resilience and recovery capacity of air cargo networks in response to 
external shocks such as the COVID-19 pandemic. The results provide 
guidance for airlines regarding fleet selection and acquisition strategies, 
and offer implications for aircraft manufacturers on design optimization, 
including the incorporation of convertible cargo capabilities in future 
aircraft. In addition, the study offers evidence-based insights for poli -
cymakers to support the development of targeted regulations that 
strengthen market resilience and crisis-response capacity. Given that 
China represents the largest air cargo market in Asia, these findings also 
carry important implications for air cargo policy and industry devel -
opment across the broader region.
2. Related studies and methodologies
Three kinds of literature relate to our work: international air cargo 
transport, passenger charter operations, and integrators. Prior research 
on international air cargo transport can be grouped into four categories: 
(i) analyses of factors influencing airport choice from the perspective of 
airlines or freighters (e.g., Gardiner et al., 2005 ; Chu, 2014 ); (ii) eval -
uations of the performance of international cargo hubs or markets along 
with driving factors (e.g., Chakraborty et al., 2020 ; Alexander and 
Merkert, 2021 ); (iii) analyses of the evolutionary patterns and network 
structures of major integrators (e.g., Bowen, 2012 ; Malighetti et al., 
2019 ), the topological properties of the global air cargo transport 
network (ACTN) ( Bombelli et al., 2020 ), and the reliability of interna -
tional air-cargo networks ( Yu et al., 2020 ); and (iv) assessments of the 
impacts of COVID-19 and airline performance under pandemic pressure. 
These studies often adopted complex network methods. For example, 
Bombelli (2020) examined how COVID-19 affected the global capacity 
of three integrators (FedEx, UPS, and DHL) as well as other cargo air -
lines, finding that the integrators escaped the early months of the 
pandemic thanks to the resilience of their networks. Deng et al. (2025)
analyzed how China's international scheduled freighter network (CISFN) 
3
In terms of flight movements, the data were estimated by the authors based 
on the lists of CAAC approvals for international non-scheduled flights. These 
lists classify non-scheduled flights into temporary extra flights and charter 
flights. Following ICAO (2022) and CAAC (2019) , this study regards all 
non-scheduled cargo flights as cargo charter flights.
4
The CAAC reported that about 207,000 international cargo flights (include 
both scheduled and non-scheduled flights) were operated in 2021, implying 
that charter flights could account for up to 39% of total operations without 
adjusting for cancellation rates. In the same year, the annual planned (avail -
able) volume of international scheduled cargo flights is estimated at approxi -
mately 283,000 flights is according to scheduled flight timetable. The CAAC 
does not differentiate between scheduled and charter flights in its internal data 
on international flight operations. If the execution rate of international sched -
uled cargo flights were similar with that of the domestic scheduled cargo 
market such as below 50% ( Zhang et al., 2025 ), charter share still exceeded 
32%.
5
The CAAC officially reported that totally 69,000 preighter flights were 
operated to and from China in 2021.
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
2 
--- Page 3 ---
adapted during the pandemic, finding that it densified its hub-and-spoke 
structure to meet demand at major hub cities. They argued that this 
hub-and-spoke configuration improved the overall robustness and 
resilience of China's international freighter network, but did not explain 
how those city-level networks were established or the driving factors.
International passenger charter operations have attracted re -
searchers' attention from various perspectives. Unlike scheduled flights 
that are regulated primarily based on bilateral agreements between 
States, international charter flights are generally authorized based on 
national regulation ( ICAO, 2022 ). The national aviation authorities al -
ways limit charter operations to protect scheduled services in the 
context of routes ( Wu et al., 2018 ). In addition to the changes in the 
tourism market and the development of LCCs, aviation deregulation 
often led to an increase in scheduled services particularly provided by 
LCCs and a decline in charter flights ( Dobruszkes et al., 2016 ). 
Numerous researchers have explored the extent to which LCCs could 
replace CCs or the impacts of increases in scheduled flights on charter 
demand. A few of which found that, in some markets, scheduled flights 
could not replace charter flights and LCCs could neither crowd out nor 
substitute for CCs, probably due to charterers (tour operators) selecting 
alternative carriers and routes following the launching of scheduled 
flights ( Wu and Hayashi, 2013 ) or long-term cooperation among CCs, 
tour operators, and destination stakeholders (Rodríguez & O'Connell, 
2018). Castillo-Manzano et al. (2017) further found that the charter 
transport system was unsensitivity to adverse events that may occur in 
the scheduled transport system, such as terrorist attacks or air accidents, 
supporting by the complexity of the tourism market. It was also 
concluded that tour operators could offset the negative impacts of 
increased in scheduled flights ( Wu et al., 2023 ). Nevertheless, these 
assertions have yet to be examined systematically from a theoretical 
perspective. It remains unclear whether there are typical patterns of 
resilience development or whether developmental pathways are shaped 
by the charterers.
Charter flights are operated based on the demand of clients (char -
terers) rather than following fixed departure times or routes ( ICAO, 
2022 ), enjoying greater operational flexibility than scheduled flights. 
Meanwhile, charter flights are typically missing from widely used 
aviation databases, which has limited the studies on passenger charters 
( Wu et al., 2018 ). Similar to charters, operational flexibility is a defining 
feature of integrators, and the absence of databases has constrained 
studies on integrators (e.g., Bowen, 2012 ; Malighetti et al., 2019 ). To 
address the operational flexibility, Bowen (2012) utilized several 
graph-theory indicators to investigate evolutionary patterns and 
network structures of U.S. integrators, finding that integrators' networks 
display the importance of time in providing shippers with time flexi -
bility. Recently, Malighetti et al. (2019) built a framework to analyze 
how four major integrators restructured their networks after obtaining 
traffic rights in China, using graphical methods and complex network 
metrics. Bombelli (2020) investigated the topological characteristics of 
integrators' networks and found that integrators escaped the early 
months of the pandemic largely unscathed, thanks to the robustness of 
their network configurations. As cited above, prior studies employed 
graphical analyses and complex network indicators to examine the 
evolutionary patterns, flexibility, efficiency, and robustness of in -
tegrators’ flight networks, providing methods for our study.
Flexibility enables a transport system to adapt to crises or new con -
ditions: higher flexibility implies greater robustness to disruptive events 
( Scott et al., 2006 ). Linking route flexibility to charterers' activities, this 
paper explores the evolution and change patterns of the cargo charter 
network and seeks to explain the mechanisms underlying the resilience 
of air charter transport systems. In the context of transport networks ( Gu 
et al., 2020 ), resilience refers to the ability to resist, absorb, adapt to, 
and recover from the negative impacts of perturbations; flexibility is 
closely related to resilience. The key difference is that resilience studies 
typically consider supply-side changes in addition to demand-side 
changes. In air transport, flexibility and robustness are complemen -
tary: a robust network can enhance the flexibility of airline operations 
( Malighetti et al., 2019 ). In this study, the term ‘resilience’ refers to the 
ability of the charter transport system to adapt to new policies, adverse 
events, market changes, and increases in scheduled flights.
3. Data and methods
3.1. Data source and processing
Data limitations have constrained research on air charters ( Wu et al., 
2018 ), since non-scheduled flights are typically excluded from widely 
used databases such as OAG and do not appear in airline reservation 
systems or published schedules. The data used in this study were 
extracted from CAAC approvals for non-scheduled international flights. 
Each approval takes the form of a list. The CAAC issued two lists each 
month: one for Chinese-flag carriers and another for foreign carriers. In 
the list for Chinese-flag carriers, flight volumes refer to operated flight 
frequencies (actual flight operations). In the list for foreign carriers, 
flight volumes refer to approved flight frequencies (planned flight data 
according to operating permits issued by the CAAC).
The lists classify non-scheduled flights into two categories: tempo -
rary extra flights and charter flights. Following ICAO (2022) and CAAC 
(2019) , we regard all non-scheduled cargo flights as cargo charter 
flights. This classification is also consistent with CAAC (2020) , which 
applies the same administrative procedures and regulatory requirements 
to both extra and charter flights. In 2020 and 2021, the approval lists 
subdivided cargo flights into three groups: (i) passenger-to-cargo (P2C) 
flights operated by Chinese flag carrier, (ii) full cargo (FC) flights 
operated by Chinese flag carrier, and (iii) cargo flights operated by 
foreign airlines. Accordingly, we classify the P2C flights operated by 
Chinese airlines as “preighter charter”, full-cargo flights operated by 
Chinese airlines as “freighter charters”, and the flights operated by 
foreign airlines as “mixed charters”.
The list includes information on the airline, route, operating period, 
application type, and flight volume. We classified the datasets by de -
parture and arrival cities, number of flights, and application types. 
Specifically, we define each departure or arrival city as a “navigable 
city” and treat each as a node. For cities served by multiple airports, all 
airports were consolidated into a single node; for example, Shanghai 
Pudong and Shanghai Hongqiao were grouped as the node “Shanghai.” 
Consequently, approximately 5% of charters operated by Chinese-flag 
airlines and 9% of those operated by foreign airlines involved two de -
parture or arrival airports in 2020. The shares declined to 1% and 3% in 
2021, respectively. For such flights, we selected the city with the shorter 
distance. For instance, Wuhan/Beijing–Montreal was treated as Bei -
jing–Montreal, and Shanghai–Addis Ababa/Cape Town as Shang -
hai–Addis Ababa. Following the CAAC's statistical standards and prior 
studies on passenger charter, we calculated the flight volumes on a one- 
way basis: each takeoff or landing counted as a single movement (one 
flight represents one aircraft movement).
It should be acknowledged that the dataset is subject to several 
limitations, including the unavailability of actual operational data for 
foreign airlines and the omission of aircraft-type information for these 
operators. Despite these constraints, the dataset is sufficient for the 
purposes of this study, as it provides comprehensive actual operational 
data for charters operated by Chinese airlines and allows preighter and 
freighter charters to be distinguished for performance analysis. More -
over, evaluating performance differences between Chinese and foreign 
airlines lies beyond the scope of this paper. Furthermore, the CAAC has 
incorporated foreign airlines' monthly charter execution rates into the 
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
3 
--- Page 4 ---
operating permit approval process, whereby an execution rate below 
90% may be considered a negative factor in evaluating an airline's 
permit applications for the relevant or subsequent month ( CAAC, 2019 ). 
This threshold is substantially higher than the CAAC's policy target for 
scheduled international cargo flights (60%). Assuming that the execu -
tion rate of international scheduled cargo flights was comparable to that 
of domestic scheduled cargo flights (i.e., below 50%) ( Zhang et al., 
2025 ), the total number of international cargo charter flights operated 
by both Chinese and foreign airlines can be conservatively estimated to 
have surpassed 6500 in each of 2020 and 2021. This implies that the 
execution rate of cargo charters operated by foreign airlines was 
generally high.
3.2. Major methods
To begin, we conducted a document analysis to track changes in 
CAAC charter policies, with attention to the effectiveness of these pol -
icies. We then applied descriptive statistics and geospatial visualization 
to examine the spatial distribution and evolutionary patterns of nodes 
(airports), edges (routes), and the overall network structure. Clients 
(charterers, e.g., tour operators or freight forwarders) typically pay 
charter carriers (airlines) round-trip fees in advance, regardless of 
whether sufficient passenger/cargo can be collected to fill the cabin. 
This business model suggests that classifying the direction of charter 
flows is unnecessary, making an undirected graph more appropriate 
than a directed one. Subsequently, we conducted a case study to eluci -
date the role of charterers (freight forwarders). In August 2022, we 
interviewed senior staff and experts from cargo agents and airlines to 
gather market information; these are cited as “ personal communica -
tions ” ( Walcott and Fan, 2017 ).
In the case study, we emphasize the role of charterers (freight for -
warders) in flight organization, freight consolidation, and city-centered 
route network optimization. This emphasis is motivated by several 
considerations. First, in terms of airline – client relationships, it is the 
client (charterer) who assumes commercial responsibility and risk for 
charter operations ( ICAO, 2022 ). Accordingly, charterers determine 
departure cities and select airlines, rather than airlines making these 
decisions themselves. Second, air cargo charter transport within China 
was supported by surface transport, following the outbreak of COVID-19 
( Deng et al., 2022 ). In practice, truck-to-air transfer systems were 
established to support charter operations. So, charterers (freight for -
warders) assumed a central coordinating role in this integrated transport 
mode: they were responsible for airport selection, consolidating cargo 
from dispersed locations, and transporting it to selected airports in a 
flexible, timely, and reliable manner. This coordinating role implies that 
the charterers (freight forwarders) played a pivotal role in building and 
optimizing charter routes, and that their operational decisions can 
significantly shape route network configurations at the city level. Third, 
we aim to interpret the mechanisms underlying the resilience of air 
charter services by linking charterers ’ activities to freight forwarder-led 
city-level route (re)construction. Chengdu was selected as the study area 
to illustrate the extensive geographical coverage of charter flight 
catchment areas supported by a nationwide truck-to-air cargo charter 
transit system. As the largest international cargo gateway in western 
China, Chengdu provides a representative context for examining the 
spatial extent of both the truck-to-air cargo transit system and the 
associated charter flight catchment areas.
In addition to analyzing the observed (real) network, we used com -
plex network indicators to quantify changes in network performance 
and reconfiguration trends in preighter charter networks. Several 
studies have employed graph theory and complex network metrics to 
examine air cargo transport networks. In particular, Malighetti et al. 
(2019) and Bombelli (2020) introduced five node-specific indicators to 
evaluate the configurations, topology, or robustness of networks built by 
global integrators DHL, FedEx, UPS, and TNT. Besides node-specific 
indicators, Bombelli et al. (2020) further introduced one edge-specific 
indicator (edge betweenness centrality) to characterize topological 
and robustness features of the global air cargo transport network. In this 
study, we likewise apply edge betweenness centrality to identify critical 
edges in the network formed by preighter charters. This allows us to 
capture structural evolution in terms of both nodes and edges. By doing 
so, we fill a research gap in the structural and dynamic analysis of highly 
flexible transport networks, such as those formed by integrators ’ flights 
and cargo charter flights. The following complex indicators were used. 
(1) Average degree 〈 k 〉
The degree of a node k
i 
is the number of edges incident upon it. For a 
point-to-point air network, higher k values correspond to greater resil -
ience ( Liao et al., 2022 ). Average degree 〈 k 〉 is calculated as the mean of 
all individual node degrees across the network, see Eq. (1) . 
K =
1
N
∑
n
i = 1
k
i
(1) 
(2) Average path length ( L )
This indicator measures the overall accessibility of a network. For an 
air transport network, lower values of L are associated with greater ef -
ficiency, see Eq. (2) . 
L =
1
n ( n   1 )
/
2
∑
i > j
d
ij
(2) 
(3) Node betweenness centrality (NBC)
Often referred to simply as betweenness centrality, this indicator 
quantifies the extent to which a node acts as a bridge or connector within 
a network. It is calculated as the proportion of all shortest paths between 
any two nodes in the network that pass through the given node, see Eq. 
(3) . 
NBC
i
=
2
( n   1 )( n   2 )
∑
n
i = 1 , i ∕= k
∑
n
j ∕= k
δ
k
ij
δ
ij
(3) 
Where δ
ij 
denotes the total number of shortest paths d
ij 
from node v
i 
to 
node v
j
. The significance of a node with high betweenness centrality lies 
in its role as a critical intermediary. 
(4) Edge betweenness centrality (EBC)
It is defined by the number of geodesics (shortest paths) going 
through an edge, reflecting the importance of each edge in a network, 
see Eq. (4) . 
EBC
i
=
2
n ( n   1 )
∑
n
i ∈ v
∑
n
j ∈ v
δ
e
ij
δ
ij
(4) 
When i ∕= j , δ
ij 
denotes the total number of shortest paths d
ij 
from node v
i 
to node v
j
, δ
e
ij 
denotes the total number of shortest paths d
ij 
from node v
i 
to node v
j
,which go through edge e ∈ E .
In this study, we calculated the average degree ( k ) and average path 
length (L ) for passenger-to-cargo (P2C) and full-cargo (FC) charters 
operated by Chinese airlines, as well as all (mixed) charters operated by 
foreign airlines. This enables a comparative analysis of the evolutionary 
patterns across these networks, with a particular focus on P2C charter 
(preighter) operations. Furthermore, node and edge betweenness 
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
4 
--- Page 5 ---
centrality are employed to capture the structural evolution and network 
reconfiguration of preighter charters operated based on actual opera -
tional data.
On a related note, we estimated the average degree and average path 
length of the network formed by foreign charter flights, although data 
completeness cannot be fully guaranteed. This introduces a potential 
mismatch between planned flight volumes and actual operations. From a 
network science perspective, measurement error is an inherent issue in 
empirical network construction and extends beyond simple missing data 
( Wang et al., 2012 ). Even high-resolution operational datasets cannot 
fully eliminate data ambiguity; for instance, Sun et al. (2022) note that it 
is not possible to distinguish preighters in real-time flight datasets. 
However, the data incompleteness may significantly affect the metrics 
such as centrality ( Martin and Niemeyer, 2020 ), whereas simpler 
structural metrics tend to be comparatively more robust ( Wang et al., 
2012 ).
The impact of data imperfections also depends on network topology. 
Scale-free networks, for example, exhibit strong tolerance to random 
failures. According to Albert et al. (2000) , such networks follow a 
power-law degree distribution ( k ) ~ k
γ
, and their inhomogeneous con -
nectivity implies that most removed nodes are low-degree nodes, which 
have limited impact on overall connectivity. Consistent with this 
mechanism, Albert et al. (2000) found that the network diameter re -
mains largely unchanged even when a non-negligible fraction of nodes 
(e.g., around 5%) are randomly removed, indicating that the global 
connectivity structure is preserved under random perturbations. More -
over, the network does not undergo abrupt fragmentation under random 
failures; instead, the giant connected component (GCC) persists even at 
relatively high levels of node removal, further demonstrating the 
inherent structural stability of such networks. Empirical evidence 
further suggests that many real-world networks exhibit power-law ex -
ponents within the range 2 < γ < 3, under which such robustness is 
particularly pronounced.
This mechanism is also supported by empirical evidence in air 
transport networks. For example, airline route networks exhibit relative 
robustness to random node failures, with the size of the GCC decreasing 
by only 5 – 10% when approximately 5% of nodes are randomly removed 
( Lordan et al., 2016 ). Similar to passenger flight networks, air cargo 
transport networks exhibit both small-world and scale-free properties 
( Bombelli et al., 2020 ; Li et al., 2022 ). It has been observed that the 
average path length of China's domestic air cargo network remains 
relatively stable over time despite network expansion and structural 
evolution ( Li et al., 2022 ). These findings indicate that international 
charter networks provide a certain degree of tolerance to random data 
incompleteness.
Taken together, above studies provide both theoretical and empirical 
support for the choices of this study. In particular, foreign charter op -
erations are characterized by relatively high execution rates. For 
instance, CAAC (2019) requires foreign airlines to maintain execution 
rates typically exceeding 90%, indicating that the majority of planned 
flights were effectively operated. In addition, during the COVID-19 
period, elevated charter premiums and increased marginal returns 
further reduced the likelihood of widespread cancellations. Under these 
conditions, discrepancies between planned and actual operations can be 
reasonably approximated as random perturbations rather than system -
atic removals. Consistent with the theoretical assumption of random 
failures in scale-free networks, the charter network is unlikely to expe -
rience structural fragmentation. While minor deviations may still exist, 
their impact on aggregate structural indicators is expected to be limited. 
Therefore, the use of scheduled charter data does not materially affect 
the estimation of key network indicators, such as average degree and 
average path length. This supports the validity and interpretability of 
the comparative analysis of network evolution across different charter 
types.
Using complex network theory, a growing body of literature has 
analyzed China's air cargo network since the outbreak of COVID-19. 
Although existing studies differ in terms of temporal scales and anal -
ysis perspectives, they generally take scheduled cargo flight networks as 
their primary research object. For example, Deng et al. (2022) evaluated 
the topological properties and their change trends of the Chinese 
scheduled freighter network (CSFN); Zhang et al. (2025) analyzed the 
spatiotemporal evolution and robustness of China's Air Cargo Network 
(CACN); and Deng et al. (2025) investigated the structural changes and 
resilience demonstrated by China's international scheduled freight 
network (CISFN). Using city-pair air freight transport data, Li et al. 
(2022) modeled China's domestic air cargo network and identified its 
structural characteristics and key socioeconomic drivers; He et al. 
(2024) explored the spatiotemporal evolution and topological charac -
teristics of China's domestic air cargo network before and during 
COVID-19 and its relationship with regional economic factors. Unlike 
existing studies that mainly focus on scheduled cargo flights, this study 
takes cargo charter flights as its research object, with particular 
emphasis on preighter operations.
Our study is closely related to Zhang et al. (2025) in terms of network 
construction and analytical methods, yet it differs substantially in 
research scope and the operational characteristics of the air cargo sys -
tem examined. Like Zhang et al. (2025) , we construct the network based 
on monthly operational data and adopt an indicator presentation 
approach used in previous studies, such as Liao et al. (2022) to illustrate 
the time-varying fluctuations of network performance metrics. Howev -
er, Zhang et al. (2025) investigated China's domestic scheduled air cargo 
transport network, without distinguishing between aircraft types. By 
contrast, this study concentrates on the international cargo charters and 
further classifies aircraft into preighters and freighters, thereby 
revealing the network performance and transformation patterns asso -
ciated with preighter charters. Moreover, charter flights are strongly 
demand-driven and characterized by operational flexibility. Their routes 
are opened or withdrawn more frequently, resulting in greater structural 
volatility and dynamic adjustments in the network. Therefore, this study 
further introduces an edge-specific indicator, jointly examining network 
dynamics from both “ node – route ” dimensions. To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first study to apply such an edge-specific indicator 
to the analysis of China's air cargo route network.
4. A review of charter policies and cargo charter traffic to and 
from China
The CAAC has historically restricted international charter operations 
to protect scheduled services. In 1989, the State Council of the People's 
Republic of China issued the Interim Provisions on the Administration of 
Non-scheduled Flights in Civil Air Transportation, stipulating that non- 
scheduled operations must not disrupt normal scheduled services. 
Consequently, in 1990, the CAAC promulgated the Provisions on the 
Administration of Non-scheduled Flights in Foreign Civil Air Trans -
portation (CCAR-119TR-R), which stated that charter flights should not 
operate on routes served by scheduled flights unless an exception ap -
plies. In 2006, CCAR-119TR-R was replaced by the Detailed Rules for the 
Business Permission for Non-scheduled Flights of Foreign Air Transport 
Enterprises (CCAR-119TR-R1) ( CAAC, 2006 ), which regulate interna -
tional charter operations with respect to documentation requirements, 
application deadlines, operational restrictions, and penalties for viola -
tions. The CCAR-119TR-R1 further affirms that the CAAC shall apply the 
principle of reciprocity in licensing non-scheduled flights. It was even 
reported that the CAAC suspended international cargo charters from 
three major airports during the 2015 peak season, likely to protect 
Chinese carriers ( Harris, 2015 ).
The CAAC also adopted a range of measures to restrict Chinese air -
lines. For example, the CAAC (2001) stated that Chinese carriers should 
impose strict limits on international and Hong Kong/Macao 
non-scheduled flight operations, as excessive charter activity had 
become a key factor contributing to the sharp deterioration of the eco -
nomic performance of their scheduled flights. Subsequently, the CAAC 
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
5 
--- Page 6 ---
(2002) established an approval-based system under which Chinese-flag 
airlines were required to apply to the CAAC for authorization before 
arranging additional or charter flights. By the late 2000s, a series of 
corruption cases related to the approval and operation of international 
charter flights (e.g., the Capital Airport charter scandals and the China 
Southern charter case) reinforced the CAAC's decision to impose strin -
gent controls on international non-scheduled operations throughout the 
2010s.
After a prolonged period of strict regulation, the CAAC began to relax 
controls on charter operations in the late 2010s. This shift originated in 
2015, when the CAAC issued the Notice on Simplifying the Approval 
Procedures for International Charter Flights Operated by Domestic 
Airlines, which replaced the prior approval regime with a record-filing 
system. Under this system, Chinese airlines are required to flight plans 
for record filing in advance and to report actual operational data to the 
CAAC on a monthly basis. However, the CAAC continues to require 
foreign airlines to obtain flight operating permits in advance. To obtain a 
permit, foreign airlines must complete slot coordination beforehand and 
submit applications to the CAAC together with the required supporting 
documentation and, where applicable, pay the air traffic rights 
compensation fee in advance. Furthermore, the CAAC still regulated 
charter operations on scheduled routes.
Following the outbreak of COVID-19, the Chinese government 
established the Joint Mechanism of the State Council on Prevention and 
Control of COVID-19 (hereinafter, the Joint Mechanism) to make inte -
grated arrangements for prevention and control efforts. In line with the 
Joint Mechanism's requirements and related provisions, the CAAC 
imposed strict limits on international passenger flights while adopting 
measures to bolster air-cargo capacity, stabilize global supply chains, 
and utilize ‘idle ’ aircraft ( ICAO, 2021 ). In April 2020, the CAAC issued 
the notice on Review and Approval of the “ Green Channel ” for Inter -
national Air Cargo Transport During the Period of Epidemic Prevention 
and Control (hereinafter, the Green Channel) ( CAAC, 2020 ). The ‘Green 
Channel ’ focused on facilitating scheduled cargo operations using 
passenger-to-cargo aircraft and promoting non-scheduled cargo opera -
tions. In particular, the Green Channel policy relaxed several application 
restrictions for foreign airlines, permitted cargo charter operations on 
routes already served by scheduled flights, and supported charter op -
erations by third-country airlines ( Table 1 ).
Subsequently, the CAAC issued the Operation Safety Bulletin on the 
Transport of Cargo in the Passenger Cabin on April 21, officially giving 
airlines the green light to preighter operations. On May 26, jointly 
announced with the Ministry of Finance (MOF), the CAAC announced 
subsidies for Chinese airlines to modify passenger aircraft to freighter 
configurations, as well as financial incentives for both Chinese and 
foreign airlines engaged in international cargo-only operations, whether 
scheduled or charter. In 2021, the MOF expanded the scope of the Civil 
Aviation Development Fund to support logistics systems, enabling local 
governments to increase cargo subsidies. For example, the Guangzhou 
Airport Economic Zone provided USD 13 million in international cargo- 
route subsidies to nine airlines and eight freight forwarders in 2021, and 
the number of international preighters departing Guangzhou rose by 
more than 50% year over year.
Table 2 shows that charter flights rose sharply to 75,000 in 2020 and 
81,000 in 2021. Compared with Chinese carriers, foreign airlines 
exhibited broader geographical coverage but experienced a decline in 
flight volume. This pattern may be partly attributable to reductions in 
preighter operations by some foreign airlines. As vaccination emerged as 
a key measure for mitigating the risk of COVID-19 transmission, several 
countries began to adopt air travel policies in the second half of 2021 
that relied primarily on passenger vaccination rates. These policy shifts 
were associated with a gradual recovery of international air passenger 
traffic. In response, many foreign airlines started to reconvert freighters 
back to passenger aircraft to accommodate rising passenger demand. 
Aviation authorities, such as the Federal Aviation Administration and 
the European Union Aviation Safety Agency, also began to phase out 
preighter operations during this period. By contrast, the CAAC 
continued to strictly restrict international passenger flights and further 
strengthened support for Chinese airlines in utilizing preighters, 
including through financial subsidies. It should be noted that evaluating 
airline performance lies outside the scope of this paper, given significant 
cross-country differences in regulatory environments and market con -
ditions. For example, during the study period, most cargo charters be -
tween China and the United States were operated by U.S. airlines.
Table 2 also shows that, from 2020 to 2021, both Chinese and foreign 
airlines experienced significant reductions in the number of routes 
alongside increases in route density, indicating a substantial trans -
formation of the overall charter flight network. Meanwhile, charter 
volume increased by 7% year over year, despite a 28% rise in scheduled 
cargo services over the same period ( Table 3 ). These trends raise 
Table 1 
CAAC (2020) relaxed controls international cargo charters.
Previous limitations Deregulation measures
1 Applicants (airlines) should 
terminate a ground-handling agency 
agreement between carriers and 
service providers.
The ground-handling agency 
agreement could be replaced by a 
ground-handling guarantee letter.
2 Applicants (airlines) should provide 
charter contracts when handling 
application.
The contract could be replaced by a 
letter requesting assistance from 
airlines produced by local government 
or authorities.
3 Applicants (airlines) must run slot 
coordination in advance and operate 
the flight as approved.
Airlines could obtain nonscheduled 
flight operation permits without going 
through slot coordination in advance.
4 No charter on route served by 
scheduled flights.
Nonscheduled (charter) flights on 
routes with existing scheduled service 
could be approved.
5 Foreign airlines need to hold full 
CCAR 129 certifications
Conditionally support the operation of 
cargo charter flights by a third-country 
carrier
Table 2 
Changes in charter amount and rout density in terms of carriers.
2020 2021 Variations
Cargo charters operated by Chinese flag airlines
Flight amount 35,996 42,220 17%
No. of routes (edges) 441 313   29%
Average flight per route (route density) 82 135 66%
Cargo charters operated by foreign airlines
Flight amount 39,258 38,456   2%
No. of routes (edges) 901 628   30%
Average flight per route (route density) 44 62 41%
Table 3 
The availability of scheduled cargo flights to and from China per week.
Passenger 
flight
Cargo flights
Freighter 
aircraft
Preighter 
aircraft
In 
total
Winter 2019/Spring 
2020
18,230 1968 0 1968
Winter 2020/Spring 
2021
592 2780 1718 4498
Winter 2021/Spring 
2022
408 3472 2292 5764
Winter 2022/Spring 
2023
840 N/A N/A 6148
Winter2023/Spring 
2024
6502 N/A N/A 3676
Note:the CAAC issues scheduled flight timetables twice a year. One for Summer/ 
Fall season (begins on the last Sunday of March), and another for Winter/Spring 
(begins on the last Sunday of October). For consistency, we used data from the 
Winter/Spring timetable to represent the availability of scheduled cargo flights.
Data source: CAAC scheduled flight timetable.
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
6 
--- Page 7 ---
concerns about the resilience of the air charter transport system in the 
face of disruptive events, such as the rapid expansion of scheduled cargo 
flight capacity. Among charter flights operated by Chinese airlines, the 
share of preighter charters increased from 71% in 2020 to 78% in 2021. 
Airlines operated preighters in three modes: (i) belly-hold only; (ii) belly 
hold plus cabin without seat removal; and (iii) belly hold plus cabin with 
seats removed. Although mode (iii) offers the greatest capacity among 
these options, it still provides only about one-third of the cargo capacity 
of a comparably sized freighter. Preighters are also less efficient than 
freighters due to labor-intensive loading processes. These constraints 
motivate our research questions: Which markets were primarily served 
by preighters, and how did preighters perform?
5. Evolution patterns and driving factors
5.1. Spatial distributions
Fig. 1 illustrates the spatial distribution of navigable cities (nodes) 
serving as origins and destinations for cargo charters. Within China, 
cities were more concentrated in the east than in the west, more in the 
south than in the north, and clustered around the Yangtze River Delta 
and Pearl River Delta. Outside China, many overseas cities disappeared 
while new ones emerged in 2021. The cities that disappeared were 
predominantly in South America and the Middle East, along the West 
African coast, and on the northern coast of the Mediterranean, with is -
land cities nearly vanishing altogether. Newly appeared cities were 
concentrated along the Silk Road, the Strait of Malacca, and the west 
coast of the Gulf of Guinea, indicating a shift in charter routes toward 
inland hubs and major maritime gateways.
Fig. 2 indicates that, within China, charters were highly concentrated 
in the eastern coastal region, moderately represented in the central and 
southwestern regions, and least frequent in the northern and western 
regions. In 2021, there was a further concentration of flights to the 
eastern region. Outside China, charter activity was concentrated in 
Europe, North America, Northeast Asia, South Asia, the Middle East, and 
Central Asia. Russia- and Central Asia – based airlines were leading 
charter operators in Asia, operating a significant number of former So -
viet military turboprop and jet airplanes on charter freight flights 
( Boeing, 2022 ). Several Russian and Central Asian airports have 
traditionally served as technical stopovers for these carriers; during the 
pandemic, they also became important stopover or transit points for P2C 
charters between China and Europe.
Fig. 3 depicts the network formed by passenger-to-cargo charters 
(P2C, preighter charters) and full-cargo charters (FC, freighter charters) 
operated by Chinese-flag airlines, as well as mixed charters provided by 
foreign airlines. In terms of charters operated by Chinese airlines, Fig. 3
(a) and (b) show that preighter charters established and reinforced a 
dual-hub structure in North America centered on Los Angeles and New 
York. In Europe, the network evolved into a stable polycentric config -
uration. The Asia-Pacific region was the primary destination for P2C 
charters. Within Asia, network structures in Northeast and Southeast 
Asia remained stable, while routes to Central Asia declined. Overall, the 
preighter charters exhibited a highly concentrated and rapidly shifting 
regional structure. By contrast, full-cargo charters reduced their 
network coverage in Asia while retaining a relatively rigid network 
structure in North America and Europe ( Fig. 3 (c) and (d)).
In detail, the volume of preighter charters increased from approxi -
mately 25,000 flights in 2020 to around 33,000 flights in 2021, largely 
driven by growth on routes to Europe and North America ( Table 4 ). In 
2020, roughly one-third of preighter operations were concentrated on 
routes between China and other Asian cities, while Europe and North 
America accounted for approximately 30% and 28% of the total, 
respectively. By 2021, the share of flights to Europe rose to 41%, and 
that of North America increased to 29%, whereas Asia's market position 
declined to third place. The expansion of preighter charters serving 
European and North American cities appears to be associated with a 
sharp surge in freight rates. In some cases, charter prices on routes to 
Europe and the United States reached USD 1.55 million and USD 2.17 
million per flight, respectively, approximately three to four times higher 
than pre-pandemic levels.
With the increase in scheduled freighter, the number of freighter 
charters declined by approximately 7%, from over 10,000 flights in 
2020 to about 9300 flights in 2021. Despite this reduction, Asia main -
tained a dominant market share in both years. The size and composition 
of the Chinese freighter fleet appear to be closely associated with the 
direction of charter operations. By the end of 2019, Chinese-flag airlines 
operated a total of 173 freighters, of which only 50 were wide-body 
aircraft suitable for long-haul routes (Li, 2020). This fleet structure 
Fig. 1. Spatial distribution of all navigable cities (nodes) s: 2020 vs. 2021.
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
7 
--- Page 8 ---
may have constrained the spatial pattern of charter flows, with over 70% 
of freighter charters operating on routes to Asian cities, particularly on 
short-haul routes to cities in Northeast and South Asia.
At the regional level, Africa, North America, and Oceania were 
predominantly served by preighters; in other words, Chinese-flag air -
lines mainly operated preighters on routes to these regions ( Table 4 ). At 
the city level. On city level, preighter charters were operated on 322 
routes in 2020 and 235 routes in 2021, and freighter charters on 179 
routes in 2020 and 109 routes in 2021 ( Table 5 ). The smaller reduction 
for preighters indicates a more stable network. The number of over -
lapping routes served by both aircraft types suggests that preighters 
were deployed mainly on routes rarely served by freighters, especially in 
2021. Notably, the share of overlapping routes fell from 22% to 10%, 
indicating that freight forwarders reduced duplicate routes and that 
route competition between aircraft types diminished.
Fig. 3 (e) and (f) reveal that foreign airlines reached more islands and 
long-haul destinations. In 2021, Europe experienced a reduction of 
nodes, while no fundamental change occurred in the North American 
market. In Africa, the charters created a regional aggregation network, 
with a decrease in overall routes but an increase in traffic to Addis Ababa 
and West African port cities. The geographical location of Addis Ababa 
suggests that cargo charter was supported by air-to-air transport. For 
example, Ethiopian Airlines ’ official page noted that Ethiopian Airlines 
played a critical role in shipping COVID-19 vaccines from China and 
distributing Chinese-made vaccines to other African countries and some 
South American cities.
It is worth noting that the number of key nodes (cities) within the 
network formed by all foreign charter operations increased in 2021, 
with Shanghai, Beijing, Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Tianjin, Chengdu, and 
Zhengzhou emerging as major hubs ( Appendix 1 ). The geographical 
distribution of these hubs, together with their operational performance, 
indicates that air cargo transport was strongly supported by surface 
transportation during the COVID-19 period ( Deng et al., 2022 ; He et al., 
2024 ). In charter operations, Chinese freight forwarders (charterers) 
assume a central coordinating role within this integrated air – truck 
transport mode, particularly in linking dispersed production locations 
with selected airports. This coordinating role, in turn, implies that the 
freight forwarders play a pivotal role in building and optimizing charter 
route networks under a less regulated, more market-oriented environ -
ment. Section 5.3 therefore aims to empirically validate this role and 
examine how freight forwarder – led coordination shapes city-level 
network configurations.
5.2. Changes in charter amounts and driving factors
5.2.1. Monthly volume in terms of charter types
Fig. 4 depicts the monthly frequency of different charters. In 2020, 
cargo charter amount started to ascend in March, surged in April and 
May, then declined steadily throughout the summer. In March, 
numerous charters were inbound supply charters, carrying personal 
protective equipment (PPE) and other medical supplies to China. 
Outbound supply charters emerged at the end of March and peaked in 
May, shipping masks, protective clothing, ventilators, and then test kits 
overseas. The decline after June was likely due to the increase of 
scheduled cargo flights (the FY2020 Summer and Autumn Scheduled 
flight timetable went effect in June), the reduction in supply charters, 
and the MOF and CAAC suspension of financial incentives for interna -
tional cargo flights.
Notably, the monthly change patterns suggest that increases in 
scheduled cargo had negative effects on cargo charter traffic, but these 
effects were uneven and temporary. Firstly, foreign charters increased in 
September 2020 and remained constant thereafter. Secondly, the P2C 
and FC charters declined in October 2020, April 2021, and October 
2021, when the new timetable took effect, but all recovered in the 
following months. Thirdly, the P2C charters escalated rapidly in 
November and December 2020. This surge was driven by soaring air 
freight rates, rising exports of rapid detection kits, growth in general 
cargo and e-commerce shipments, and the traditional Q4 peak season 
driven by Black Friday and Christmas shipments.
In 2021, the charters displayed a more variable but sustained 
Fig. 2. Spatial distribution of cities (nodes) with at least 500 charters: 2020 vs. 2021.
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
8 
--- Page 9 ---
pattern, with four peak months in February, March, June, and 
September. Several factors contributed to this volatility, including the 
increase in scheduled cargo flights, the sharp rise in freight rates, the 
growth of cross-border e-commerce shipments, and the distribution of 
COVID-19 vaccines. We found a strong alignment between monthly P2C 
charter volumes and the monthly export volumes of China-produced 
COVID-19 vaccines ( Appendix 2 ).
5.2.2. Major cities
Table 6 shows that all top-ranked Chinese cities in 2020 experienced 
a decline in charter flight volumes in 2021, except Beijing, Guangzhou, 
and Kunming. This decline was likely influenced by the increase in 
scheduled flights, though other factors also played a role. For example, 
at Shanghai Pudong International Airport, the CAAC's ‘closed-loop 
management ’ for frontline cargo-handling staff caused significant 
manpower shortages, forcing the airport to prioritize scheduled flights 
and thereby reducing charter operations in 2021.
Fig. 3. Route networks in terms of charter types: 2020 vs. 2021.
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
9 
--- Page 10 ---
The experiences of Beijing, Guangzhou, and Kunming further suggest 
that additional city-level factors affected charter activity. For Beijing, 
home to Beijing Capital International Airport, charter traffic was partly 
driven by CAAC special measures and global anti-COVID-19 measures. 
in March 2020, the CAAC required all international passenger flights 
bound for Beijing to first land at one of twelve designated “ first-entry ” 
airports. This policy indirectly increased charter traffic to and from 
Beijing and nearby airports such as Zhengzhou. In 2021, China became 
the world's largest exporter of COVID-19 vaccines, with Sinopharm and 
Sinovac Biotech as the main manufacturers. Both companies established 
headquarters and initial production facilities in Beijing. This geographic 
concentration of vaccine manufacturing, combined with the airport's 
cold-chain infrastructure, significantly boosted COVID-19 vaccine and 
medical supply charters from Beijing in that year.
Guangzhou's experience highlights the impact of airport customs 
clearance capacity. To facilitate cargo charter and preighter operations, 
Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport Customs created an expedited- 
clearance model known as ‘Whole-Unit Load Device (ULD) Collection 
and Rapid Sorting. ’ Under this model, cargo listed on the same Export 
Customs Declaration Sheet was consolidated into a single ULD upon 
Table 4 
Market served by the passenger-to-cargo (P2C, preighter) in term of overseas cities by regions.
Overseas city in terms of region In 2020 In 2021 2020-2021 changes
Flight Amount Market Share
a
Flight Amount Market Share
a
Flight amount Market Share
a
Africa 54 96% 24 100%   30 4%
Asia 8528 53% 8494 56%   34 4%
Central Asia 224 68% 142 27%   82   41%
Northeast Asia 1956 37% 2544 46% 588 9%
South Asia 1682 35% 1042 29%   640   6%
Europe 7584 76% 13572 87% 5988 11%
North America 7116 93% 9572 93% 2456   1%
Oceania 2192 99% 1254 100%   938 1%
South America 0 N/A 0 N/A 0 N/A
Total 25474 71% 32916 78% 7442 7%
a
Proportion of preighter among the charter operated by Chinese airlines (preighter + freighter).
Table 5 
Number of cargo charter routes served by preighter and freighter.
In 2020 In 2021 2020-2021
routes (edges) routes (edges) Changes
Charters operated by Chinese flag 
airlines
441 313   29%
1 Preighter charters 322 235   27%
2 Freighter charters 179 109   39%
No. of overlapping routes 90(22%) 31(10%)   59(-12%)
Fig. 4. Monthly number of different cargo charter flights.
Table 6 
Top 10 Chinese and overseas cities (nodes) in terms of flight amount: 2020 vs. 2021.
In 2020 In 2021
Chinese cities Flight volume Overseas cities Flight volume Chinese cities Flight volume Overseas cities Flight volume
1 Shanghai 21,278 Los Angeles 5166 Shanghai 13,368 Los Angeles 6322
2 Guangzhou 7296 Moscow 4112 Beijing 11,244 London 4896
3 Beijing 6568 Tokyo 3684 Guangzhou 9704 Seoul 3976
4 Shenzhen 5694 Seoul 3562 Kunming 5116 Moscow 3932
5 Zhengzhou 4204 Dhaka 3264 Shenzhen 4560 Yangon 3490
6 Hangzhou 2954 London 2566 Zhengzhou 3908 Frankfurt 3370
7 Chengdu 2908 Doha 2242 Hangzhou 3632 Dhaka 3208
8 Kunming 2292 Osaka 2138 Wuhan 2458 Addis Ababa 2862
9 Changsha 2274 Frankfurt 2038 Qingdao 2374 Tokyo 2840
10 Chongqing 2206 Manila 1980 Xiamen 2312 Milan 2796
Note: it does not necessarily correlate to the amount recorded by the respective airports.
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
10 
--- Page 11 ---
arrival at the airport's export cargo sorting zone. Each ULD was linked to 
a Master Air Waybill (MAWB), enabling unified processing for security, 
inspection, and loading, while rapid sorting minimized secondary 
handling within the cargo terminal. According to an official report, this 
model reduced average clearance times from 24.38 to 12.53 h for im -
ports and from 1.54 to 0.87 h for exports. With these innovations in 
airport customs clearance capacity, combined with the cargo subsidies 
offered by the airport authority to airlines and agents, the number of 
international preighters departing from Guangzhou increased by more 
than 50% year over year, while cargo charter flights grew by over 33% 
in 2021.
As the only airport in Southwest China designated by the General 
Administration of Customs as an entry port for imported fresh fruit, 
Kunming Changshui International Airport likely benefited from this 
status. This growth may also have been driven by its strategic position as 
the principal cargo hub serving South Asia, Southeast Asia, and the In -
dian Ocean region. In 2021, the local government increased subsidies to 
support the international cargo logistics system. Although the official 
report did not disclose the precise subsidy amount, the subsidies clearly 
played a pivotal role in shaping charter operations. This was partly re -
flected in the statistic that 80% of Chinese-made PPE and vaccines 
exported to Myanmar were shipped via charter flights between Kunming 
and Yangon.
Among the top 10 overseas cities, Los Angeles, Moscow, London, 
Seoul, Frankfurt, Dhaka, Tokyo, and Milan were the top 10 cities for the 
second year running. All nonstop scheduled passenger flights between 
China and the United Kingdom were suspended in January 2021, as a 
result, London moved up from sixth to second in that year. In Asia, Seoul 
increased in both flight amount and rank, one city (Yangon) appeared, 
and two cities (Doha and Osaka) disappeared. More than that, the Af -
rican city of Addis Ababa ranked eighth in 2021, from where some 
charters departed to the third destinations without unloading cargo 
immediately. It is difficult to explain why Los Angeles and Seoul expe -
rienced such large growth in 2021. One possible explanation is that 
should be those two countries had already established more mature 
charter operation models. For example, the share of charter operations 
in U.S. – South Korea nonstop air freight traffic increased from 35% in 
2019 to 50% in 2020.
In summary, at the city level, charter operations were influenced not 
only by scheduled flights but also by a range of additional factors, such 
as airport operational efficiency, civil aviation and central government 
policies, local measures and subsidies, global epidemic prevention reg -
ulations, airport location, and market demand. Driven by profit incen -
tive and constrained by these factors, freight forwarders leased aircraft 
from airlines, which then operated flights under charter contracts. The 
next section presents case studies that illustrate how freight forwarders 
organize outbound charters, optimize operational efficiency, and 
enhance the resilience of the air charter transport system.
5.3. The role of freight forwarders
Primarily, this section examines how charter flights are organized 
and how city-centered route networks are optimized through this truck- 
to-air transit system. After the outbreak of COVID-19, Chinese charterers 
(freight forwarders) and their agents often consolidated cargo and 
trucked it to charter departure airports, typically using container trucks. 
Over time, multiple city- (airport-) centered trucking networks coa -
lesced into a nationwide truck-to-air cargo transit system. Chengdu was 
selected as the case study area because it ranks first in air cargo 
throughput in western China, and the analysis aims to demonstrate the 
spatial coverage of the trucking networks and charter catchment areas.
Fig. 5 maps a network centered on Chengdu. This network connects 
Chengdu with major airports and logistics hubs across China, extending 
eastward to Shanghai, northward to Beijing, and southward to 
Guangzhou. Supported by this system, the forwarders (charterers) 
collect shipments from factories, warehouses, and logistics centers, 
consolidate them in Chengdu, and dispatch them overseas via charters. 
In practice, the charter catchment area extended to a 56-h trucking 
radius. Theoretically, the coverage of this network changed dynami -
cally, synchronizing with the consolidation strategies adopted by char -
terers for each flight. To be more precise, each charter operation 
contributes to greater flexibility of the whole truck-to-aircraft charter 
cargo transit system. Flexibility enables a transport system to adapt to 
crises or new conditions: higher flexibility means stronger robustness 
against disruptive events ( Scott et al., 2006 ). In this way, we explained 
the mechanisms underlying the resilience of air charter transport 
Fig. 5. A truck route network with key information. Source: Feight forwarder.
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
11 
--- Page 12 ---
systems in the context of charterer activities.
Fig. 5 also lists the shipments carried by a Boeing 777-300 preighter. 
A local factory needed to export lithium-battery products and entrusted 
the task to a freight forwarder. Based on the factory's dispatch schedule 
and final destination, the forwarder signed a charter agreement with an 
airline and, after receiving the factory's advance payment, paid a deposit 
to the airline. Because the Boeing 777-300's capacity far exceeded the 
volume of the lithium-battery shipment, the forwarder distributed the 
surplus space to its agents and other forwarders. Ultimately, the flight 
carried 4.5 tons of cargo, comprising 1185 items across 38 MAWBs. By 
volume, 73% were consolidation consignments (CONSOL), while only 
25% consisted of lithium-ion batteries. This case demonstrates that 
preighter charter operations rely on multi-party cooperation. To reduce 
commercial risk, the freight forwarder redistributed excess capacity 
among other forwarders and consolidated shipments from multiple 
sources, thereby acting as a capacity broker among shippers, airlines, 
and other agents.
China's major cities (airports) are well connected by expressways, 
which enables charterers to consolidate cargo from geographically 
dispersed places to charter departure airports. The cargo collection 
points can be regarded as spokes, while the charter departure airport 
functions as the hub; together, they form an airport-centered hub-and- 
spoke network. Supported by surface transportation, the freight for -
warders can transport cargo not only from various spoke to airports but 
also between airports. As such, the charterers could respond to abrupt 
changes (e.g., shortages of airport loading staff, adjustments in epidemic 
control measures, or fluctuations in infection rates) by selecting alter -
native departure airports. They may also bypass the nearest airport by 
transporting cargo to a more distant one or by leasing aircraft from a 
specific airline, driving by various factors. Gradually, they established 
specialized destination groups for each hub city (airport).
Fig. 6 reveals how top 10 Chinese cities (ranked by charter volume in 
2020) differ in their major destination. It could be generally observed 
that each Chinese city is connected to a distinct set of major destinations, 
with limited overlap across cities. A detailed analysis is conducted for 
Shanghai, Zhengzhou, and Chengdu, which serve as leading logistics 
hubs in China's eastern, central, and western regions, respectively. 
Shanghai was connected to numerous destinations via charters (bright 
yellow routes). The charters primarily connected Zhengzhou with 
Russia, Central Asia, and EU cities, with Zhengzhou – Moscow and 
Zhengzhou – Luxembourg as key routes (bright green routes). The 
network centered on Chengdu (bright blue routes) was relatively sparse 
and featured a large proportion of routes heading to Southeast Asian 
cities. In 2021, this differentiation becomes more pronounced.
Fig. 6 (b) illustrates that differences became more pronounced in 
2021, suggesting that the forwarders reinforced the variability among 
cities in terms of destination groups. This freight-forwarder-led city- 
level route (re)construction approach enabled each city (major airport) 
to present one or more distinct destination clusters, thereby reducing 
route competition among cities and improving the overall performance 
of the charter system. Regarding the factors that impacted freight for -
warders ’ airport selection, this approach reduced the importance of 
ground-transport distance. To a certain degree, the location of the 
destination became a factor impacting airport selection by freight 
forwarders.
6. The performance of preighters
6.1. Performance evolution
As can be seen in Fig. 7 , preighter charters achieved better perfor -
mance in 2021: k values increased and remained at a higher level 
throughout the year, and L values declined with less fluctuation. Unlike 
P2C's sharp optimization, the freighters kept a stable but limited per -
formance. It is worth noting that preighters outperformed freighters in 
both resilience and efficiency in 2021, as well as (mixed) foreign char -
ters, particularly in terms of network efficiency. Compared with 
freighter charters, preighter operations are characterized by higher 
labor intensity and complex consolidation requirements, which demand 
closer collaboration between freight forwarders, shippers, airlines, air -
ports, and governmental authorities. For example, due to the manual 
handling required for cabin loading, freight forwarder staff were 
sometimes needed to load cargo or assist airlines in supervising the 
process in some cases. It seems that deep cooperation enabled preighter 
charters to outperform freighters.
Fig. 6. Major charter destinations of the top 10 Chinese hubs: 2020 vs. 2021. 
Note: the major destinations refer to cities served by 10 or more charter flights, represented by black dots in the figures.
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
12 
--- Page 13 ---
6.2. Network reconfiguration trends
Table 7 lists the top 10 nodes and edges within the network formed 
by preighter charter flights. The NBC ranking reveals that the preighter 
network shifted from a China-dominated structure to a more globally 
dispersed configuration. In 2020, seven of the top 10 nodes were located 
in China. By 2021, overseas cities increased to six. London and Los 
Angeles consistently served as the most important overseas nodes. 
Vancouver emerged as a new North American gateway, Paris appeared 
as an EU anchor city, and Almaty became a key bridging hub between 
China and Europe.
EBC measures the importance of a route within an air freight network 
by capturing its bridging function. In 2020, the majority of top-ranked 
routes were linked to Shanghai; the top three edges were Urum -
qi – London, Shanghai – Seoul, and Urumqi – Yekaterinburg; and five of the 
top 10 edges connected with Asian cities. By 2021, the bridging pattern 
underwent a marked reorientation: Guangzhou surged to the forefront 
with four key bridges; the top three routes became Guangzhou – Almaty, 
Urumqi – Almaty, and Guangzhou – London; and Central Asian routes 
appeared for the first time.
Both NBC and EBC results consistently demonstrate significant 
structural reconfiguration of the preighter network. In terms of spatial 
location, Guangzhou lies in South China, while Shanghai occupies a 
strategic position on the eastern seaboard. In 2021, Guangzhou sur -
passed Shanghai as the principal node within the network, with seven of 
the ten most significant edges linked to it, indicating a geographical 
reorientation of the network toward southern China. The reconfigura -
tion also extended the network's reach: the number of long-haul routes 
( ≥ 6000 km) doubled from three in 2020 to six in 2021, and the average 
distance of the top ten edges increased from 4067 km to 6386 km. Thus, 
the network transitioned from a China-concentrated structure in 2020 to 
a southern-China – centered, globally dispersed, and long-haul-oriented 
configuration in 2021.
7. Conclusion and discussion
Taking China as the study area, this paper examines the evolution of 
international cargo charter operations during 2020 – 2021, focusing on 
preighter operations and the role of freight forwarders. There are three 
major results. First, aviation deregulation and the promotion of pre -
ighters boosted cargo charter operations, which in turn enhanced 
China's integration into global supply chains by providing flexible ca -
pacity and routes. Other drivers included the surge in e-commerce de -
mand, Chinese carriers' growing recognition of air cargo's strategic 
importance, and new slot policies and financial subsidies ( Deng et al., 
2022 ). Second, cargo charter operations underwent profound network 
transformations during period 2020 to 2021. The results of descriptive 
statistics show that charters became increasingly concentrated on routes 
connected with major overseas hubs; geographic visualization reveals a 
shift of charter routes toward overseas inland hubs and major maritime 
gateways; and complex network indicators demonstrate a (re)organi -
zation of the network formed by preighter charters from a 
China-concentrated structure to a globally dispersed and 
long-haul-oriented configuration. And third, freight forwarders assumed 
the commercial risk for charter operations ( ICAO, 2022 ), acting not only 
as capacity brokers but also as central players in route development and 
network optimization.
As one of the strategic measures adopted by airlines in response to 
the COVID-19 crisis, preighter operations offered airlines a convenient 
and cost-effective way to utilize their aircraft ( Zheng et al., 2024 ). It also 
Fig. 7. Visual indication of average changes in the values of each indicator.
Table 7 
Top 10 nodes and edges within passenger-to-cargo (P2C) charter networks.
In 2020 In 2021
NBC EBC NBC EBC
1 Shanghai Urumqi-London Guangzhou Guangzhou-Almaty
2 Guangzhou Shanghai-Seoul Shanghai Urumqi-Almaty
3 Chengdu Urumqi- 
Yekaterinburg
Beijing Guangzhou-London
4 Beijing Shanghai-Islamabad London Guangzhou-Osaka
5 London Shanghai-Osaka Chengdu Shanghai-London
6 Seoul Shanghai-London Los Angeles Guangzhou-Los 
Angeles
7 Shenzhen Chengdu-London Paris Shanghai-Osaka
8 Chongqing Shanghai-Yangon Almaty Guangzhou-Moscow
9 Urumqi Shanghai-Ho Chi 
Minh
Vancouver Guangzhou-Paris
10 Los Angeles Guangzhou-Seoul Osaka Chengdu-London
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
13 
--- Page 14 ---
created opportunities for passenger-only airlines, particularly LCCs and 
CCs, to start international cargo operations. The preighter model re -
mains an influential factor in today's supply chain, which continues to 
face challenges and uncertainties. Our results revealed that the pre -
ighters primarily served routes rarely covered by freighters, experienced 
route re-construction, and outperformed freighters in both resilience 
and network efficiency. Furthermore, the charters reached more desti -
nations than scheduled flights, thereby enhancing the resilience and 
flexibility of China's air cargo system.
In the context of COVID-19, charter operations in China heavily 
depended on truck networks. Various city (airport)-centered truck net -
works enabled freight forwarders to extend charter catchment areas to 
56 h through truck-to-aircraft systems, a distance far exceeding the 
general catchment area of air cargo, such as the 12-h radius ( Boonekamp 
and Burghouwt, 2017 ). Meanwhile, the forwarders may select a more 
distant airport instead of the geographically closest on, driving by 
various factors, This freight-forwarder-led city-level route (re)con -
struction approach enabled each city to present one or more distinct 
destination clusters, thereby reducing route competition among cities. 
Regarding the factors that impacted freight forwarders' airport selection, 
this approach serves as a supplement to related research on airlines' 
airport selection during COVID-19, such as Tanrıverdi et al. (2022) . As 
in scheduled cargo service, local origin-destination demand, airport 
road access, and airport/local government financial incentive are also 
crucial factors affecting forwarders’ airport selection decisions ( Chu, 
2014 ); and the presence of freight forwarders is the most critical factor 
influencing airport choice for airlines serving major hubs ( Franziska 
et al., 2016 ).
Our study found that the increase in scheduled service did have 
negative influences on cargo charter demand, but these negative in -
fluences were uneven and not lasting. This resilience results from 
charter operations being led by freight forwarders within a market- 
driven, less regulated environment, allowing them to adapt to changes 
effectively through route optimization and network transformation. 
Meanwhile, cargo charter flights predominantly follow point-to-point 
network patterns, and this architecture demonstrates greater resilience 
to both targeted node and random edge removal compared with the hub- 
and-spoke system ( Wuellner et al., 2010 ; Wong et al., 2020 ). During the 
COVID-19–impacted period, Chinese international scheduled freighters 
refined a hub-and-spoke network to meet surging cargo demand from 
major hubs ( Deng et al., 2025 ), implying that charters played different 
role. Furthermore, various city (airport)-centered truck route networks 
formed a nationwide truck-to-aircraft charter cargo transit network. The 
geographic coverage of each city (airport)-centered truck network 
changed dynamically, synchronizing with the consolidation strategies 
adopted by charterers for each flight. Therefore, each charter operation 
would increase the flexibility of the whole charter network. In this way, 
we explained the mechanisms underlying the resilience of the charter 
transport system.
Based on these findings, several policy implications can be drawn. 
First, aviation authorities should recognize cargo charters as a structural 
component of the air cargo system rather than as purely temporary or 
exceptional arrangements. Integrating hub-and-spoke networks 
(scheduled services) with point-to-point networks (cargo charters) could 
enhance overall system efficiency, even in the post-COVID era. Second, 
preighter operations represented a policy-enabled response to the 
COVID-19 crisis and largely disappeared by mid-2023 after aviation 
authorities phased out related regulatory exemptions (IATA, 2025). 
Rather than fully phasing out preighter operations, aviation policy -
makers could consider establishing conditional frameworks that allow 
such services to be reactivated during periods of demand surges or 
systemic disruption. Alternatively, preighter operations could be 
incorporated into the cargo charter regulatory framework, thereby 
supporting airlines’ long-term fleet planning. Third, the CAAC could 
regulate charter traffic primarily through supervision rather than by 
tightly limiting charter operations on routes already served by scheduled 
flights. In addition, the CAAC should improve the statistical framework 
for cargo charters by requiring all airlines to report actual charter flight 
data.
For industry practitioners, the findings highlight several recom -
mendations. Airlines and airports should strengthen cooperation with 
freight forwarders; aircraft manufacturers should place greater 
emphasis on convertible cargo capabilities, such as quick-change 
aircraft; and both LCCs and CCs should seek regulatory authorization 
to operate passenger aircraft on cargo-only missions. Chinese integrators 
also need to expand their fleets and network coverage. As of 2019, the 
two leading firms, SF Airlines and YTO Cargo Airlines, operated a 
combined total of only about 68–72 freighters, revealing a substantial 
capacity gap compared with FedEx's 681 aircraft and UPS's 572 aircraft. 
Under normal operating conditions, approximately half of China's in -
ternational air cargo is transported in the belly holds of passenger 
aircraft, with the remainder carried by dedicated freighters. Because 
belly cargo is closely tied to passenger flight operations, cargo move -
ments are embedded within passenger-driven flight networks, making it 
difficult to separately identify and precisely characterize freight flows. 
The pandemic-induced suspension of passenger flights created a natural 
experiment in which cargo flows were dominated by freighters and 
preighter operations. By integrating our finding with scheduled services, 
all practitioners can more clearly identify freight volumes and flows, 
providing valuable guidance for future fleet planning, network design, 
and route selection.
This study is subject to several limitations. First, the dataset for 
charter flights operated by foreign airlines is derived from CAAC-issued 
operating permits. Despite this constraint, the dataset as a whole is 
adequate to support the analytical framework and to produce robust and 
reliable findings. Second, the analysis centers on freight forwarders 
while overlooking perspectives of other stakeholders, including airlines, 
airports, and regulators. Third, cross-market differences are not exam -
ined. Future research should examine the factors affecting charterers’ 
airport selection and the interplay between charter and scheduled ser -
vices. We view this paper as an initial step in the limited empirical 
literature on the resilience of the air charter transport system, and the 
same approaches could be applied to evaluate the performance of pas -
senger charters.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Chuntao Wu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Supervision, Methodology, Formal analysis. Xiaohe He: 
Visualization, Validation, Software, Data curation. Yuliang Peng: 
Visualization, Validation, Software, Data curation.
Funding information
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding 
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Declarations of conflict interest
None.
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
14 
--- Page 15 ---
Appendix 1
Visualization of key nodes and edges within network built by foreign charters.
Appendix 2
Overseas supply of COVID-19 vaccines by Chinese companies.
Data source: UNICEF; may include locally produced doses.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Albert, R., Jeong, H., Barab ´asi, A.-L., 2000. Error and attack tolerance of complex 
networks. Nature 406 (6794), 378 – 382 .
Alexander, D.W., Merkert, R., 2021. Applications of gravity models to evaluate and 
forecast US international air freight markets post-GFC. Transp. Policy 104, 52 – 62 .
Boeing, 2022. World Air Cargo Forecast 2022 – 2041. The Boeing Company .
Boeing, 2024. World Air Cargo Forecast 2024 – 2043. The Boeing Company .
Bombelli, A., 2020. Integrators' global networks: a topology analysis with insights into 
the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic. J. Transport Geogr. 87, 102815 .
Bombelli, A., Santos, B.F., Tavasszy, L., 2020. Analysis of the air cargo transport network 
using a complex network theory perspective. Transport. Res. E Logist. Transport. 
Rev. 138, 101959 .
Boonekamp, T., Burghouwt, G., 2017. Measuring connectivity in the air freight industry. 
J. Air Transport. Manag. 61, 81 – 94 .
Bowen, J., 2012. A spatial analysis of FedEx and UPS: Hubs, spokes, and network 
structure. J. Air Transport. Manag. 24, 419 – 431 .
Castillo-Manzano, J.I., Castro Nu ˜no, M., L ´opez Valpuesta, L., Pedregal, D.J., 2017. 
Measuring the LCC effect on charter airlines in the Spanish airport system. J. Air 
Transport. Manag. 65, 110 – 117 .
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
15 
--- Page 16 ---
Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC), 2001. Notice on Strengthening the 
Administration of Additional Flights on International and Hong Kong/Macao 
Scheduled Routes and Strictly Controlling Charter Flights .
Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC), 2002. Notice on Strictly Controlling 
Additional and Charter Flights on International and Hong Kong/Macao Routes .
Civil Aviation Administration of China, 2006. Detailed Rules for the Business Permission 
for Non-scheduled Flights of Foreign Air Transport Enterprises (CCAR-119TR-R1) .
Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC), 2019. Notice on regulating international 
charter flight operations (draft for comments) [in Chinese]. Available at: htt 
ps://www.caac.gov.cn/HDJL/YJZJ/201908/t20190801_197895.html .
Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC), 2020. Notice on Launching a Review and 
Approval of “ Green Channel ” for International Air Cargo Transport During the 
Period of Epidemic Prevention and Control .
Chakraborty, S., Ghosh, S., Sarker, B., Chakraborty, S., 2020. An integrated performance 
evaluation approach for the Indian international airports. J. Air Transport. Manag. 
88, 101853 .
Chu, H.C., 2014. Exploring preference heterogeneity of air freight forwarders in the 
choices ocarriers and routes. J. Air Transport. Manag. 37, 45 – 52 .
Deng, Y., Zhang, Y., Wang, K., 2022. An analysis of the Chinese scheduled preighters 
network during the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic. J. Transport Geogr. 99, 
103298 .
Deng, Y., Zhang, Y., Wang, K., He, Y., 2025. Navigating through and beyond the COVID- 
19 crisis: evaluating the resilience of Chinese international air freighter networks. 
Transp. Policy 163 (000) .
Dobruszkes, F., Mondou, V., Ghedira, A., 2016. Assessing the impacts of aviation 
liberalisation on tourism: some methodological considerations derived from the 
Moroccan and Tunisian cases. J. Transport Geogr. 50, 115 – 127 .
Franziska, K., Roselinde, K., Peter, G., Eddy, V.V., Ann, V., 2016. The origin – destination 
airport choice for all-cargo aircraft operations in Europe. Transport. Res. E Logist. 
Transport. Rev. 87, 53 – 74 .
Gardiner, J., Ison, S., Humphreys, I., 2005. Factors influencing cargo airlines' choice of 
airport: an international survey. J. Air Transport. Manag. 11 (6), 393 – 399 .
Gu, Y., Fu, X., Liu, Z., Xu, X., Chen, A., 2020. Performance of transportation networks 
under perturbations: reliability, vulnerability, and resilience. Transport. Res. E 
Logist. Transport. Rev. 133, 101809 .
Harris, D., 2015. Peak season hit by Chinese charter ban. Air Cargo World 18. Accessed 
January 2024. https://cargofacts.com/allposts/business/strategy/peak-season-hit 
-by-chinese-charter-ban/ .
He, H., Wu, H., Tsui, K.W.H., Wang, B., Fu, X., 2024. Spatiotemporal evolution of air 
cargo networks and its impact on economic development: an analysis of China's 
domestic market before and during the COVID-19 pandemic. J. Transport Geogr. 
117, 103872 .
International Air Transport Association (IATA, 2025. Global outlook for air transport: 
protectionism on the rise. IATA Sustainability and Economics .
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), 2022. Eleventh Session of the Statistics 
Division: Statistical Definition of Nonscheduled all-cargo .
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), 2021. China's policies on international 
flights during the COVID-19 pandemic (HLCC 2021-WP/214, FAL/70). In: High- 
Level Conference on COVID-19. Montr ´eal, Canada . 
Li, H., Li, J., Zhao, X., Kuang, X., 2022. The morphological structure and influence factors 
analysis of China's domestic civil aviation freight transport network. Transp. Policy 
125, 207 – 217 .
Liao, M.Z., Wu, C.T., Yan, H.M., 2022. Recovery of Chinese low-cost carriers after the 
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. J. Air Transport. Manag. 105, 102282 .
Lordana, O., Sallan, J.M., Escorihuela, N., Gonzalez-Prieto, P., 2016. Robustness of 
airline route networks. Physica A 445, 18 – 26 .
Malighetti, P., Martini, G., Redondi, R., Scotti, D., 2019. Air transport networks of global 
integrators in the more liberalized Asian air cargo industry. Transp. Policy 80, 
12 – 23 .
Martin, J., Niemeyer, D., 2020. On the impact of network size and average degree on the 
robustness of centrality measures. Network Sci. 1 – 22 .
Morrell, P.S., Klein, T., 2018. Moving Boxes by Air: the Economics of International Air 
Cargo. Routledge .
Scott, D., Novak, D.C., Aultman-Hall, L., Guo, F., 2006. Network robustness index: a new 
method for identifying critical links and evaluating the performance of 
transportation networks. J. Transport Geogr. 14, 215 – 227 .
Sun, X., Wandelt, S., Zhang, A., 2022. How did COVID-19 impact air transportation? A 
first peek through the lens of complex networks. J. Air Transport. Manag. 89, 
101928 .
Tanrıverdi, G., Ecer, F., Durak, M., 2022. Exploring factors affecting airport selection 
during the COVID-19 pandemic from air cargo carriers' perspective through the 
triangular fuzzy dombi-bonferroni BWM methodology. J. Air Transport. Manag. 102, 
102302 .
Walcott, S.M., Fan, Z., 2017. Comparison of major air freight network hubs in the U.S. 
and China. J. Air Transport. Manag. 61, 64 – 72 .
Wang, D.J., Shi, X., McFarland, D.A., Leskovec, J., 2012. Measurement error in network 
data: a re-classification. Social Network 34, 396 – 409 .
Wong, A., Tan, S., Chandramouleeswaran, K.R., Tran, H.T., Talley, W., 2020. Data-driven 
analysis of resilience in airline networks. Transport. Res. E Logist. Transport. Rev. 
143, 102098 .
Wu, C., Hayashi, Y., 2013. Evolution of outbound charter operations in Japan post- 
deregulation. Transp. Policy 30, 92 – 100 .
Wu, C.T., Jiang, Q.Y., Yang, H.J., 2018. Changes in cross-strait aviation policies and their 
impact on tourism flows since 2009. Transp. Policy 63, 61 – 72 .
Wu, C.T., Xu, W.J., Tusi, K.W.H., 2023. Analyzing factors affecting charter flight service 
demand: a case of Taiwan. J. Air Transport. Manag. 110, 102424 .
Wuellner, D.R., Roy, S., D'Souza, R.M., 2010. Resilience and rewiring of the passenger 
airline networks in the United States. Phys. Rev. 82 (5), 056101 .
Yu, W., Yang, J., Yan, R., 2020. Measuring service reliability in international air-cargo 
networks. Transport. Res. Pol. Pract. 132, 872 – 888 .
Zhang, L., Yang, H., Bian, L., 2025. Complex network analysis of China's domestic air 
cargo network based on actual flight data. Transp. Policy 168, 133 – 156 .
Zheng, S., Wang, K., Jiang, C., 2024. Converting passenger aircraft into cargo planes 
under volatile market demand. Transport. Res. Pol. Pract. 181, 104013 .
C. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport Policy 184 (2026) 104173 
16 
